# Wash CLI

## Subcommands

### wasmCloud Management

The commands below help you manage your [wasmCloud][wasmcloud-otp] instance.

#### `wash new`

Create new wasmCloud projects from predefined [templates](https://github.com/wasmCloud/project-templates). This command is a one-stop-shop for creating new actors, providers, and interfaces for all aspects of your application.

#### `wash up`

Bootstrap a [wasmCloud][wasmcloud-otp] environment in one easy command, supporting both launching NATS and wasmCloud in the background as well as an "interactive" mode for shorter lived hosts.

After `wash up` completes, you should be able to visit the wasmCloud dashboard at `http://localhost:4000` (by default).

[wasmcloud-otp]: https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-otp

#### `wash down`

Tear down an existing wasmCloud environment launched (that was launched with `wash up`)

### `wash app` (experimental)

Manage declarative applications and deployments (powered by [`wadm`][wadm]).

### wasmCloud instance administration

These commands help you administer a *running* wasmCloud instance.

#### `wash ctx`

Automatically connect to your previously launched wasmCloud lattice with a managed context or use contexts to administer remote wasmCloud lattices.

#### `wash ctl`

Interact directly with a wasmCloud [control-interface](https://github.com/wasmCloud/control-interface), allowing you to imperatively schedule actors, providers and modify configurations of a wasmCloud host. Can be used to interact with local and remote control-interfaces.

#### `wash call`

Invoke a wasmCloud actor directly with a specified payload. This allows you to test actor handlers without the need to manage capabilities and link definitions for a rapid development feedback loop.

#### `wash drain`

Manage contents of the local wasmCloud cache. wasmCloud manages a local cache that will avoid redundant fetching of content when possible. `drain` allows you to manually clear that cache to ensure you're always pulling the latest versions of actors and providers that are hosted in remote OCI registries.

### WASM module utilities

The commands below act on compiled WASM modules (actors, providers, etc).

#### `wash claims`

Generate JWTs for actors, capability providers, accounts and operators. Sign actor modules with claims including capability IDs, expiration, and keys to verify identity. Inspect actor modules to view their claims.

### `wash par`

Create, modify and inspect [provider archives][par], a TAR format that contains a signed JWT and OS/Architecture specific binaries for native capability providers.

[par]: https://wasmcloud.com/docs/reference/host-runtime/provider-archive
### `wash reg`

Push and Pull actors and capability providers to/from OCI compliant registries. Used extensively in our own CI/CD and in local development, where a local registry is used to store your development artifacts.

### Development

The commands below aid development for the wasmCloud ecosystem (actors, providers and interfaces).

### `wash keys`

Generate ed25519 keys for securely signing and identifying wasmCloud entities (actors, providers, hosts). Read more about our decision to use ed25519 keys in our [ADR](https://wasmcloud.github.io/adr/0005-security-nkeys.html).

### `wash lint`

Perform lint checks on .smithy models, outputting warnings for best practices with interfaces.

### `wash validate`

Perform validation checks on .smithy models, ensuring that your interfaces are valid and usable for codegen and development.

### `wash gen`

Generate code from [smithy](https://awslabs.github.io/smithy/index.html) files using [weld codegen](https://github.com/wasmCloud/weld/tree/main/codegen).

This is the primary method of generating actor and capability provider code from .smithy interfaces. Currently has first class support for Rust actors and providers, along with autogenerated HTML documentation.

[wadm]: https://github.com/wasmCloud/wadm

### `wash build`

Build and sign a wasmCloud actor, provider, or interface. This command is normally executed from the folder that contains `wasmcloud.toml`.

### `wash help`

Print the help text and view all subcommands along with their arguments. You may use `-h`/`--help` as well on any subcommand.
